---
published: true
layout: post
title: 5 Marketing E-commerce Trends You Cant Ignore
categories: Marketing
image: assets/images/marketing/trends.webp
---
In the fast-paced world of e-commerce marketing, trends wield tremendous power. Just like the latest delicacies or the hottest fashion styles, marketing strategies are heavily influenced by what's popular and attention-grabbing. The online marketplace is dynamic, and staying relevant requires staying on top of the trends that suit your brand.

The year has been a whirlwind of progress in the realm of e-commerce marketing strategy. While not every trendy approach may be a perfect fit for every online store, it's crucial to keep a keen eye on the latest developments. Some of these trends may be fresh and innovative, while others are timeless classics making a strong comeback. Regardless of your experience level as a seller, delving into these current fads can yield significant benefits, boosting engagement and revenue for your business.

### Engaging with Influencers
Discover the untapped power of influencer relationships - a groundbreaking e-commerce strategy that has emerged in recent years. Influencers, those social media stars with massive followings, can become your marketing allies, promoting products they truly believe in - for a price, of course. Their endorsements come in various forms, from captivating Instagram posts and engaging YouTube demos to sponsored TikTok video series. With over 70 percent of the US population on social media, these relationships could be the golden ticket to boosting traffic to your online store. Don't worry if you can't afford top-tier influencers; check out micro-influencers with smaller but fiercely devoted followings.

### The Allure of Alluring Packaging
It's a harsh reality, but it's true: shoppers are drawn to products with attractive packaging over lackluster ones. No matter how effective or useful a product may be, consumers want it to look good too. In the visual realm of social media, appearances have never been more critical. The attractiveness of your product can determine whether a potential customer taps on your Instagram ad, explores your virtual store, and ultimately makes a purchase. Take inspiration from Glossier, the wildly successful online cosmetics brand; their straightforward yet stylish "millennial pink" packaging entices even the most skeptical buyers to try out their products. By presenting your items in aesthetically pleasing, eco-friendly packaging, you can tap into consumers' desire for a beautiful lifestyle.

### The Power of QR Codes
During the height of the COVID-19 pandemic, QR codes skyrocketed in popularity as businesses sought ways to minimize physical contact. Now, these small, boxy codes can serve as a clever tool to keep your customers engaged with your brand. You can strategically place QR codes on product packaging, linking them to your social media profiles, satisfaction surveys, or exclusive discount pages for loyal customers. Additionally, you can add QR codes to stickers and business cards, creating a direct path to your online store for potential new customers. Meet your customers where they already spend a significant amount of time: on their smartphones. Implement these smart QR codes, and you'll keep the connection alive with your audience.

### Backlinks! 
This powerful tactic is here to stay and can work wonders for your business. Here's the deal: By forging connections with other website owners, like those awesome bloggers out there, you can create a mutual relationship where you link to each other's sites. These magical links are known as 'Backlinks' in the marketing realm. And guess what? They are like rocket fuel for your site's SEO! When search engine algorithms spot backlinks, they see your site as rock-solid and legit. Take the inspiring story of grinderPUNCH, an Amazon FBA business that sells trendy eyewear to various demographics. They embraced the backlink strategy, earning those valuable links on affiliate websites. And the result? A mind-blowing boost in search engine rankings and a surge of potential customers, who might not have discovered grinderPUNCH without those game-changing backlinks. Unleash the power of backlinks, and watch your e-commerce empire soar to new heights!

### Ignite Your Brand with Captivating Video Marketing!
Are you ready to ride the wave of the future? Brace yourself because it's all about visuals, baby! The Internet is a visual playground, where people crave entertainment. Just take a look at the meteoric rise of TikTok and Instagram Reels in the last year. From snappy 10-second clips to in-depth YouTube content, videos give you the magic wand to showcase your products like never before. You can dazzle your audience by demonstrating product uses, answering their burning questions, or even showing how to assemble your fantastic creations. The best part? You don't have to compromise on your brand's unique personality! And here's a jaw-dropping fact: YouTube is the second-largest search engine on the planet, right after Google. People are out there hungrily searching for your content. So, seize the moment, unleash your creativity, and let the world witness the power of your brand through engaging videos!
